REFERENCE.md, before:

# Technical Reference

Deep technical details for understanding the implementation.
For getting started, see [README.md](README.md).

## Table of Contents

1. [MaxSim Algorithm](#maxsim-algorithm)
2. [Token Pooling](#token-pooling)
3. [Matryoshka Embeddings](#matryoshka-embeddings)
4. [SIMD Implementation](#simd-implementation)
5. [Mathematical Properties](#mathematical-properties)
6. [Glossary](#glossary)
7. [References](#references)

---

## MaxSim Algorithm

### Intuition

Dense retrieval compresses an entire document into one vector. Late interaction
keeps **one vector per token**, preserving fine-grained semantics.

```mermaid
graph LR
    subgraph Query
        q1["q₁"] --- q2["q₂"] --- q3["q₃"]
    end
    subgraph Document
        d1["d₁"] --- d2["d₂"] --- d3["d₃"] --- d4["d₄"]
    end
    q1 -.->|max| d2
    q2 -.->|max| d1
    q3 -.->|max| d4
```

For each query token, find its best-matching document token, then sum.

### Formal Definition

Given query tokens $Q = [q_1, q_2, \ldots, q_m]$ and document tokens $D = [d_1, d_2, \ldots, d_n]$
where each $q_i, d_j \in \mathbb{R}^d$:

$$\text{MaxSim}(Q, D) = \sum_{i=1}^{m} \max_{j \in [1,n]} (q_i \cdot d_j)$$

### Pseudocode

```python
def maxsim(Q, D):
    if len(Q) == 0 or len(D) == 0:
        return 0.0
    total = 0.0
    for q in Q:
        total += max(dot(q, d) for d in D)
    return total
```

### Complexity

- **Time**: $O(m \times n \times d)$
- **Space**: $O(1)$ additional

### Properties

1. **Asymmetric**: $\text{MaxSim}(Q, D) \neq \text{MaxSim}(D, Q)$
2. **Monotonic**: Adding doc tokens cannot decrease score
3. **Permutation invariant**: Token order doesn't affect score

---

## Token Pooling

### The Storage Problem

ColBERT stores ~128 vectors per document. For 10M documents:

$$\text{Storage} = 10^7 \times 128 \times 128 \times 4 = 655\text{ GB}$$

### How It Works

```mermaid
flowchart TB
    subgraph Input["8 tokens"]
        t1["t₁"] & t2["t₂"] & t3["t₃"] & t4["t₄"] & t5["t₅"] & t6["t₆"] & t7["t₇"] & t8["t₈"]
    end
    subgraph Cluster["Clustering"]
        c1["cluster₁<br/>t₁,t₂,t₃"] 
        c2["cluster₂<br/>t₄,t₅"]
        c3["t₆"]
        c4["t₇"]
        c5["t₈"]
    end
    subgraph Output["5 pooled"]
        p1["mean(t₁,t₂,t₃)"]
        p2["mean(t₄,t₅)"]
        p3["t₆"]
        p4["t₇"]
        p5["t₈"]
    end
    t1 & t2 & t3 --> c1 --> p1
    t4 & t5 --> c2 --> p2
    t6 --> c3 --> p3
    t7 --> c4 --> p4
    t8 --> c5 --> p5
```

### Pool Factor

| Factor | Reduction | Quality Loss | When to Use |
|--------|-----------|--------------|-------------|
| 2 | 50% | ~0% | Default choice |
| 3 | 66% | ~1% | Good tradeoff |
| 4 | 75% | 2-5% | Use `hierarchical` feature |
| 8+ | 87%+ | 5-10% | Storage-critical only |

Quality loss measured on MS MARCO and BEIR benchmarks.

### Greedy vs Ward's

**Greedy** (default): Merge most similar pair. $O(n^3)$.

**Ward's** (`hierarchical` feature): Minimize within-cluster variance.
Better for factor 4+. Uses [kodama](https://docs.rs/kodama).

Reference: [Clavié et al., 2024](https://arxiv.org/abs/2409.14683)

---

## Matryoshka Embeddings

### Key Insight

Train with loss at multiple dimension checkpoints:

$$\mathcal{L} = \sum_{k \in \{64, 128, 256, \ldots\}} \lambda_k \cdot \text{loss}(v_{0:k})$$

This packs important information into early dimensions.

### Two-Stage Refinement

```mermaid
flowchart LR
    subgraph Full["Full Embedding (768d)"]
        head["Head (128d)<br/>coarse"]
        tail["Tail (640d)<br/>fine"]
    end
    head -->|"Stage 1"| candidates["1000 candidates"]
    candidates -->|"Stage 2"| tail
    tail --> results["10 results"]
```

### Blending Formula

$$\text{final} = \alpha \cdot \text{original} + (1-\alpha) \cdot \text{tail\_sim}$$

- $\alpha = 1$: Original scores only
- $\alpha = 0.5$: Equal blend (default)
- $\alpha = 0$: Tail similarity only

Reference: [Kusupati et al., 2022](https://arxiv.org/abs/2205.13147)

### Future: 2D Matryoshka

2D Matryoshka (Li et al., 2024) extends MRL by training with loss at multiple
**layers** AND dimensions:

$$\mathcal{L}_{2D} = \sum_{l \in \text{layers}} \sum_{k \in \text{dims}} \lambda_{l,k} \cdot \text{loss}(v^{(l)}_{0:k})$$

This enables truncating intermediate transformer layers at inference time,
reducing latency ~50% with ~85% quality retention. Not yet implemented here.

Reference: [Li et al., 2024](https://arxiv.org/abs/2402.14776)

---

## SIMD Implementation

### Dispatch Strategy

```mermaid
flowchart TD
    check["dim >= 16?"]
    check -->|yes| arch["Architecture?"]
    check -->|no| portable["Portable loop"]
    arch -->|x86_64 + AVX2| avx["AVX2+FMA<br/>8 floats/op"]
    arch -->|aarch64| neon["NEON<br/>4 floats/op"]
    arch -->|other| portable
```

### Safety

All `unsafe` code has `// SAFETY:` comments documenting:
1. Feature detection performed
2. Alignment requirements met
3. Bounds checking

---

## Mathematical Properties

### Dot Product

For $a, b \in \mathbb{R}^d$:

$$a \cdot b = \sum_{i=1}^{d} a_i b_i$$

Properties:
- **Commutative**: $a \cdot b = b \cdot a$
- **Bilinear**: $(\alpha a) \cdot b = \alpha(a \cdot b)$
- **Self-product**: $a \cdot a = \|a\|^2$
- **Cauchy-Schwarz**: $|a \cdot b| \leq \|a\| \cdot \|b\|$

### Cosine Similarity

$$\cos(a, b) = \frac{a \cdot b}{\|a\| \cdot \|b\|}$$

Properties:
- **Bounded**: $\cos(a, b) \in [-1, 1]$
- **Scale-invariant**: $\cos(\alpha a, \beta b) = \cos(a, b)$ for $\alpha, \beta > 0$

### NaN Handling

Uses `f32::total_cmp` for deterministic ordering:

$$\text{NaN} < -\infty < \ldots < 0 < \ldots < +\infty$$

---

## Glossary

| Term | Definition |
|------|------------|
| **ANN** | Approximate Nearest Neighbor search |
| **ColBERT** | Contextualized Late Interaction over BERT |
| **Dense retrieval** | One vector per document |
| **Late interaction** | One vector per token |
| **MaxSim** | Sum of per-query-token max similarities |
| **MRL** | Matryoshka Representation Learning |
| **Pool factor** | Compression ratio (factor 2 = 50% reduction) |
| **Ward's method** | Clustering minimizing within-cluster variance |

---

## References

### Papers

- **ColBERT**: [arxiv.org/abs/2004.12832](https://arxiv.org/abs/2004.12832)
- **PLAID**: [arxiv.org/abs/2205.09707](https://arxiv.org/abs/2205.09707)
- **Matryoshka**: [arxiv.org/abs/2205.13147](https://arxiv.org/abs/2205.13147)
- **Token Pooling**: [arxiv.org/abs/2409.14683](https://arxiv.org/abs/2409.14683)

### Libraries

- **kodama**: [docs.rs/kodama](https://docs.rs/kodama)

Commit message:

Fix README examples: complete code with variable definitions

REFERENCE.md, after:

# Technical Reference

Deep technical details for understanding the implementation.
For getting started, see [README.md](README.md).

## Table of Contents

1. [MaxSim Algorithm](#maxsim-algorithm)
2. [Token Pooling](#token-pooling)
3. [Matryoshka Embeddings](#matryoshka-embeddings)
4. [SIMD Implementation](#simd-implementation)
5. [Mathematical Properties](#mathematical-properties)
6. [Glossary](#glossary)
7. [References](#references)

---

## MaxSim Algorithm

### Intuition

Dense retrieval compresses an entire document into one vector. Late interaction
keeps **one vector per token**, preserving fine-grained semantics.

```mermaid
graph LR
    subgraph Query
        q1["q₁"] --- q2["q₂"] --- q3["q₃"]
    end
    subgraph Document
        d1["d₁"] --- d2["d₂"] --- d3["d₃"] --- d4["d₄"]
    end
    q1 -.->|max| d2
    q2 -.->|max| d1
    q3 -.->|max| d4
```

For each query token, find its best-matching document token, then sum.

### Formal Definition

Given query tokens $Q = [q_1, q_2, \ldots, q_m]$ and document tokens $D = [d_1, d_2, \ldots, d_n]$
where each $q_i, d_j \in \mathbb{R}^d$:

$$\text{MaxSim}(Q, D) = \sum_{i=1}^{m} \max_{j \in [1,n]} (q_i \cdot d_j)$$

### Pseudocode

```python
def maxsim(Q, D):
    if len(Q) == 0 or len(D) == 0:
        return 0.0
    total = 0.0
    for q in Q:
        total += max(dot(q, d) for d in D)
    return total
```

### Complexity

- **Time**: $O(m \times n \times d)$
- **Space**: $O(1)$ additional

### Properties

1. **Asymmetric**: $\text{MaxSim}(Q, D) \neq \text{MaxSim}(D, Q)$
2. **Monotonic**: Adding doc tokens cannot decrease score
3. **Permutation invariant**: Token order doesn't affect score

---

## Token Pooling

### The Storage Problem

ColBERT stores ~128 vectors per document. For 10M documents:

$$\text{Storage} = 10^7 \times 128 \times 128 \times 4 = 655\text{ GB}$$

### How It Works

```mermaid
flowchart TB
    subgraph Input["8 tokens"]
        t1["t₁"] & t2["t₂"] & t3["t₃"] & t4["t₄"] & t5["t₅"] & t6["t₆"] & t7["t₇"] & t8["t₈"]
    end
    subgraph Cluster["Clustering"]
        c1["cluster₁<br/>t₁,t₂,t₃"] 
        c2["cluster₂<br/>t₄,t₅"]
        c3["t₆"]
        c4["t₇"]
        c5["t₈"]
    end
    subgraph Output["5 pooled"]
        p1["mean(t₁,t₂,t₃)"]
        p2["mean(t₄,t₅)"]
        p3["t₆"]
        p4["t₇"]
        p5["t₈"]
    end
    t1 & t2 & t3 --> c1 --> p1
    t4 & t5 --> c2 --> p2
    t6 --> c3 --> p3
    t7 --> c4 --> p4
    t8 --> c5 --> p5
```

### Pool Factor

| Factor | Reduction | Quality Loss | When to Use |
|--------|-----------|--------------|-------------|
| 2 | 50% | ~0% | Default choice |
| 3 | 66% | ~1% | Good tradeoff |
| 4 | 75% | 2-5% | Use `hierarchical` feature |
| 8+ | 87%+ | 5-10% | Storage-critical only |

Quality loss measured on MS MARCO and BEIR benchmarks.

### Greedy vs Ward's

**Greedy** (default): Merge most similar pair. $O(n^3)$.

**Ward's** (`hierarchical` feature): Minimize within-cluster variance.
Better for factor 4+. Uses [kodama](https://docs.rs/kodama).

Reference: [Clavié et al., 2024](https://arxiv.org/abs/2409.14683)

### Future: Token Importance Weighting

**Weighted Chamfer** (Archish et al., Nov 2025) extends MaxSim with learnable
per-token weights:

$$\text{WeightedMaxSim}(Q, D) = \sum_{i=1}^{m} w_i \cdot \max_{j \in [1,n]} (q_i \cdot d_j)$$

where weights $w_i$ are learned and constrained to sum to 1. Shows +2% improvement
on BEIR in few-shot settings. Not yet implemented here.

Reference: [arxiv.org/abs/2511.16106](https://arxiv.org/abs/2511.16106)

---

## Matryoshka Embeddings

### Key Insight

Train with loss at multiple dimension checkpoints:

$$\mathcal{L} = \sum_{k \in \{64, 128, 256, \ldots\}} \lambda_k \cdot \text{loss}(v_{0:k})$$

This packs important information into early dimensions.

### Two-Stage Refinement

```mermaid
flowchart LR
    subgraph Full["Full Embedding (768d)"]
        head["Head (128d)<br/>coarse"]
        tail["Tail (640d)<br/>fine"]
    end
    head -->|"Stage 1"| candidates["1000 candidates"]
    candidates -->|"Stage 2"| tail
    tail --> results["10 results"]
```

### Blending Formula

$$\text{final} = \alpha \cdot \text{original} + (1-\alpha) \cdot \text{tail\_sim}$$

- $\alpha = 1$: Original scores only
- $\alpha = 0.5$: Equal blend (default)
- $\alpha = 0$: Tail similarity only

Reference: [Kusupati et al., 2022](https://arxiv.org/abs/2205.13147)

### Future: 2D Matryoshka

2D Matryoshka (Li et al., 2024) extends MRL by training with loss at multiple
**layers** AND dimensions:

$$\mathcal{L}_{2D} = \sum_{l \in \text{layers}} \sum_{k \in \text{dims}} \lambda_{l,k} \cdot \text{loss}(v^{(l)}_{0:k})$$

This enables truncating intermediate transformer layers at inference time,
reducing latency ~50% with ~85% quality retention. Not yet implemented here.

Reference: [Li et al., 2024](https://arxiv.org/abs/2402.14776)

---

## SIMD Implementation

### Dispatch Strategy

```mermaid
flowchart TD
    check["dim >= 16?"]
    check -->|yes| arch["Architecture?"]
    check -->|no| portable["Portable loop"]
    arch -->|x86_64 + AVX2| avx["AVX2+FMA<br/>8 floats/op"]
    arch -->|aarch64| neon["NEON<br/>4 floats/op"]
    arch -->|other| portable
```

### Safety

All `unsafe` code has `// SAFETY:` comments documenting:
1. Feature detection performed
2. Alignment requirements met
3. Bounds checking

### Performance Note: Subnormals

Denormalized (subnormal) floats can cause **140+ cycle penalties** per SIMD
operation. Values below ~$10^{-38}$ for f32 trigger microcode paths.

In practice, this is rare for embeddings (typically normalized to unit length).
If you encounter slow performance with small values, consider flush-to-zero
mode at the application level.

---

## Mathematical Properties

### Dot Product

For $a, b \in \mathbb{R}^d$:

$$a \cdot b = \sum_{i=1}^{d} a_i b_i$$

Properties:
- **Commutative**: $a \cdot b = b \cdot a$
- **Bilinear**: $(\alpha a) \cdot b = \alpha(a \cdot b)$
- **Self-product**: $a \cdot a = \|a\|^2$
- **Cauchy-Schwarz**: $|a \cdot b| \leq \|a\| \cdot \|b\|$

### Cosine Similarity

$$\cos(a, b) = \frac{a \cdot b}{\|a\| \cdot \|b\|}$$

Properties:
- **Bounded**: $\cos(a, b) \in [-1, 1]$
- **Scale-invariant**: $\cos(\alpha a, \beta b) = \cos(a, b)$ for $\alpha, \beta > 0$

### NaN Handling

Uses `f32::total_cmp` for deterministic ordering:

$$-\infty < \ldots < -0 < +0 < \ldots < +\infty < \text{NaN}$$

NaN values sort to the **end** (lowest priority in descending sort).

---

## Glossary

| Term | Definition |
|------|------------|
| **ANN** | Approximate Nearest Neighbor search |
| **ColBERT** | Contextualized Late Interaction over BERT |
| **Dense retrieval** | One vector per document |
| **Late interaction** | One vector per token |
| **MaxSim** | Sum of per-query-token max similarities |
| **MRL** | Matryoshka Representation Learning |
| **Pool factor** | Compression ratio (factor 2 = 50% reduction) |
| **Ward's method** | Clustering minimizing within-cluster variance |

---

## References

### Papers

- **ColBERT**: [arxiv.org/abs/2004.12832](https://arxiv.org/abs/2004.12832)
- **ColBERTv2**: [arxiv.org/abs/2112.01488](https://arxiv.org/abs/2112.01488)
- **PLAID**: [arxiv.org/abs/2205.09707](https://arxiv.org/abs/2205.09707)
- **Matryoshka**: [arxiv.org/abs/2205.13147](https://arxiv.org/abs/2205.13147)
- **2D Matryoshka**: [arxiv.org/abs/2402.14776](https://arxiv.org/abs/2402.14776)
- **Token Pooling**: [arxiv.org/abs/2409.14683](https://arxiv.org/abs/2409.14683)
- **Token Importance**: [arxiv.org/abs/2511.16106](https://arxiv.org/abs/2511.16106)

### Libraries

- **kodama**: [docs.rs/kodama](https://docs.rs/kodama)
